 


 In Flaubert’s Madame Bovary, Emma is unwilling to accept her reality.  Flaubert’s use of imagery and symbolism in aspects of French bourgeois daily life leads to a better understanding of the dissatisfaction of middle-class social positions. This becomes apparent through the imagery used in describing eating manners. Meanwhile, through the symbolic use of machines, confinement to an unsatisfactory life can be seen. Moreover, windows represent the unreachable possibility of escaping that dissatisfaction. 
Strong emotions of dissatisfaction with one's social class leads to regular suffering from these emotions. This is evident in Madame Bovary, with the daily activities of eating and drinking symbolizing dissatisfaction in society. When Emma shows a strong desire to curb her dissatisfaction through her interactions with Charles, this becomes apparent. “She offered him something to drink. He refused, she insisted” (Flaubert 17). The short phrase, “he refused” (17), shows that Emma does not receive the satisfaction she desires. This, immediately followed by her insistence, shows a desire to engage in more social interactions than she is provided. Once Emma achieves the satisfaction she desires, she “had to drink it from below; and, with her head right back, her lips pushed out, her neck straining … while the tip of her tongue, from between perfect teeth, licked delicately over the bottom of the glass” (17). Flaubert deliberately introduces many pauses into the passage in order to emphasize the sheer amount of effort expended all over Emma's body in order to obtain satisfaction. As a result, the reader is given a clear idea of the degree to which achieving satisfaction is valued by her. Licking “delicately over the bottom of the glass” (17) shows how not even a single bit of this interaction is wasted. This desire shows the difficulty in experiencing enough fulfilling interactions in society, resulting in a powerful desire for each source of satisfaction that does arise. Therefore, the lack of fulfilling opportunities creates dissatisfaction with one’s social class.
In addition, Emma receives limited exposure to balls, social gatherings exclusive to the upper class of which Emma yearns to be a part more routinely than this single occasion - a gesture of gratitude from their host to Charles for his medical aid. The fine food eaten by the nobles, the “quantities of Spanish and German wines, with shellfish soup and almond milk soup, Trafalgar puddings” (41) shows what a better life looks like. Her dissatisfaction with her own social class is apparent afterward when she finds that “her journey to La Vaubyessard had made a hole in her life, just like those great crevasses that a mountain storm will sometimes open up in a single night” (44).  The elegant diction describing the food at the ball highlights the differences between lower and upper classes. This creates the image of an admirable ball, elegant, but also rife with depravity, which symbolizes the ultimate desire of the lower classes, who can only peek in the windows. The simile used in comparing the effects of the ball on Emma to “great crevasses that a mountain storm will sometimes open up in a single night” (44) creates the imagery of great damage, symbolizing how only one night of exclusivity is sufficient to dissatisfy naive Emma. Hence, the limited exposure to the upper class results in a desire to be a part of that class and creates dissatisfaction with current social positions. 
 In contrast to her admiration of the eating manners at the ball, Emma’s own social position provides her diminishing satisfaction. “As [Charles] got older, he seemed to be getting coarser in his ways [and] he used to suck his teeth; eating his soup, he made a gurgling noise with every mouthful, and as he put on weight, his eyes, already tiny, seemed to push up towards his forehead by the swelling of his cheeks” (48). Flaubert makes a very lengthy list of negative aspects which indicates that Charles’ manners are not to the desired level of sophistication. Charles, seen as “getting coarser in his ways” (48) shows that Emma’s satisfaction is dwindling as a result of lacking sophistication. Thus, sophistication is desirable among some lower classes to compensate for one’s social position and lack of sophistication results in dissatisfaction. Therefore, the symbols associated with eating indicate dissatisfaction with accepting one’s life. 
Equally important, Flaubert’s imagery conveys the impression that machines are merely objects performing repetitive tasks, an aspect of a boring, monotonous life. It is evident that the symbol of the lathe represents an undesirable lifestyle.  For instance, “on Sundays from morning until night, and every afternoon, if the weather was bright, you could see at the window of his attic the lean profile of Monsieur Binet bent at his lathe, making the monotonous snoring droning noise that was audible even in the Golden Lion” (79). The diction used describing this bourgeoisie task, as being done from morning to night and the machine making monotonous noise, symbolizes how this kind of work is dull and uninteresting. Hence, the repetitive nature of bourgeois life leads to dissatisfaction. 
In addition, the lathe convinces Emma that she must escape her current lifestyle. At one point, noise from the lathe evokes the thought of suicide. To demonstrate, “It was just as if the swaying surface of the village-square flowed up into the walls and the floor tilted on its end, rather like a ship pitching about. She was standing right on the edge, almost hanging, swinging in empty space … and the snoring of the lathe went on and on, like a voice furiously calling to her”  (166). The humming of the lathe being compared to an angry voice shows discontentment with the machine, and the lathe operating during the transformation of the world symbolizes how machines are the source of these changes because machines have removed enjoyment in life. The imagery used in conveying the use of machines shows them as repetitive and dull. Flaubert’s use of machines, an aspect of the working class, to create this imagery, shows dissatisfaction with being a part of a lower class. This dissatisfaction provides motivation to want to escape one’s social position. 
Although windows symbolize a possible escape from one’s social position, the use of windows shows the unreachable possibility of an escape filled with satisfaction. Despite the ability to see oneself escaping to a better position, one cannot reach it.  For instance, Emma is reminded of her childhood by seeing the peasants outside the ball window. “Madame Bovary turned her head and glimpsed outside, close to the panes, peasant faces gazing in. And memories of Les Bertaux came back to her. She saw the farmhouse, the muddy pond, her father in his smock under the apple-trees, and an image of herself, in the old days, skimming her finger over the cream on the milk-churns in the dairy” (40). Windows allow one to see past memories but not relive them. Emma sees her past in detail but is unable to go on the other side of the window, which shows her inability to return to her simple life, as she is confined to a desire for a higher status. Hence, the use of windows conveys the idea that when one is bound to societal expectations, one can only desire to return to their simple life, which shows dissatisfaction with the social positions of the time period.  
Furthermore, windows symbolize the constant desire of what one lacks. For example, Emma desires to love the men she sees from outside the window. “Sitting in her armchair, near the window, she watched the village people going past along the pavement. Leon, twice a day, went from his office to the Golden Lion. Emma, from afar, heard him coming; she would lean forward to listen, and the young man would slip behind the curtain” (77). Flaubert sets Emma at a window because windows provide a view to the outside, where one can see beyond what can be experienced in one’s personal world. Spending this much time watching the outside world through a window shows the lack of satisfaction felt on the inside. Emma believes that what is on the other side of the window is the ideal love she seeks, only to find each time when she experiences that love, it does not truly satisfy her. Hence, what is seen through the window symbolizes the potential satisfaction passing by. The diction used in describing the man as “[slipping] past the curtain” (77) shows how the satisfaction seen is unreal and cannot actually be attained. Thus, always desiring more than what one currently has shows dissatisfaction with one’s status in society. 
In conclusion, Emma’s dissatisfied personality is shaped by aspects of daily life that are present in the French bourgeoisie. Madame Bovary reinforces the position that the constraining situation that middle-class people were in during the 19th Century played an important role in the difficulties and dissatisfaction experienced. Upward mobility was impossible, and the glimpses of the upper class merely teased and fed unhappiness to the lower classes.


